DOCS-2822: Add provisioning guides (#3269)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/how-tos/provision-setup.md

---
title: "Complete setup for a machine"
linkTitle: "Set a machine up"
weight: 69
type: "docs"
description: "If you have received a machine that uses Viam and have been pointed to this guide, this guide will show you how to set it up."
images: ["/platform/provisioning-demo.gif"]
videos: ["/platform/provisioning-demo.webm", "/platform/provisioning-demo.mp4"]
---

If you have received a machine with Viam pre-installed on it, this guide will show you how to complete your device setup.

{{< alert title="In this page" color="tip" >}}

1. [Set up your machine using the Viam mobile app](#set-up-your-machine-using-the-viam-mobile-app).
1. [Set up your machine using the captive portal](#set-up-your-machine-using-the-captive-portal).
1. [Update machine configuration](#update-machine-configuration) to update hotspot details or add additional networks.
   {{< /alert >}}

## Prerequisites

- Physical hardware constituting a machine

> - A laptop or mobile device if using the Viam mobile app

Reviewer: Should mention it must have wifi. Desktops with wifi work fine too.

> ## Set up your machine using the Viam mobile app

Reviewer: Should mention this is an either/or with the Captive Portal method below. Otherwise this reads like "step number 2 of 3" in the overall page.

Author: adding to the top of the page.

{{< table >}}
{{% tablestep %}}
**1. Install the Viam mobile app**

You can find the mobile app on the [App Store](https://apps.apple.com/vn/app/viam-robotics/id6451424162) and on [Google Play](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.viam.viammobile&hl=en&gl=US).

<a href="https://apps.apple.com/vn/app/viam-robotics/id6451424162" target="_blank">
  <img src="https://github.com/viamrobotics/docs/assets/90707162/a470b65d-1b97-412f-9f97-daf902f2f053" width="200px" alt="apple store icon" class="center-if-small" >
</a>

<a href="https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.viam.viammobile&hl=en&gl=US" target="_blank">
  <img src="https://github.com/viamrobotics/docs/assets/90707162/6ebd6960-08c5-41d4-81f9-42293fbfdfd4" width="200px" alt="google play store icon" class="center-if-small" >
</a>

{{% /tablestep %}}
{{% tablestep %}}
**2. Create a machine**

Open the Viam mobile app and sign in.
Then, select an organization and location for your machine.
If you have already created a machine, select it.
If you have not yet created a machine, click on **Add new smart machine** and give your machine a name.
{{% /tablestep %}}
{{% tablestep %}}

> **3. Connect to your machine's WiFi hotspot**

Reviewer: I'm not sure this should be documented here. The mobile app will tell users when to switch networks, and they should follow the instructions there instead I think.

Author: I'll change the title. I think it's good to have for completeness. People may read through this guide without doing the actions at the time, just to get an overview.

  "agent-provisioning": {
    ...
    "attributes": {
      ...
      "hotspot_password": "NewAndSafePassword",
    }
  }
}
```

{{% /tablestep %}}
{{% tablestep link="/configure/agent/#networks"%}}
**2. Add WiFi networks**

If your machine might move between different WiFi networks, you can enable `roaming_mode` and add additional networks to the [`viam-agent` configuration](/configure/agent/#configuration).

To add additional networks, go to your machine's page in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and use the JSON editor.

Look for the `agent` configuration and add lines 7-19 to your configuration, changing the credentials as to the ones for your networks:

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-line="7-20"}
...
"agent": {
  "agent-provisioning": {
    ...
    "attributes": {
      ...
      "roaming_mode": true,
      "networks": [
        {
          "type": "wifi",
          "ssid": "fallbackNetOne",
          "psk": "myFirstPassword",
          "priority": 30
        },
        {
          "type": "wifi",
          "ssid": "fallbackNetTwo",
          "psk": "mySecondPassword",
          "priority": 10
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

{{% /tablestep %}}

> {{< /table >}}

Reviewer: I don't think these are needed here. Most users don't need to do these steps. Perhaps just mention them and link the existing section for these configuration options.

If you are flashing a Raspberry Pi using the Raspberry Pi Imager, flash a 64-bit image to your SD card and customize at least the hostname when prompted.

Eject and reinsert the card to make sure it's mounted with the newly written contents.

{{% /expand%}}

## Decide on the provisioning method

You can choose to let your end users complete machine setup by using a captive web portal or a mobile app.

If you choose to have a mobile app experience, you can use the [Viam mobile app](/fleet/control/#control-interface-in-the-viam-mobile-app) or create your own custom mobile app using the [Flutter SDK](https://flutter.viam.dev/viam_protos.provisioning.provisioning/ProvisioningServiceClient-class.html) or the [TypeScript SDK](https://github.com/viamrobotics/viam-typescript-sdk/blob/main/src/app/provisioning-client.ts) to connect to `viam-agent` and provision your machines.

If you choose to use the Viam mobile app, you must provide a {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="fragment" text="fragment" >}} for provisioning.
If you do not yet have a fragment, follow the steps to [Create a configuration fragment](/how-tos/one-to-many/) and make a note of the fragment ID.

> If you choose to use the captive web portal, you can optionally create a machine already and provide its credentials configuration file at <FILE>/etc/viam.json</FILE>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you choose to use the captive web portal, you can optionally create a machine in advance and provide its credentials configuration file at <FILE>/etc/viam.json</FILE>.
```

A Raspberry Pi boot partition has been found mounted at /Volumes/bootfs
This script will modify firstrun.sh on that partition to install Viam agent.
Continue pre-install? (y/n): y
Path to custom viam-provisioning.json (leave empty to skip):
Creating tarball for install.
a opt
a opt/viam
a opt/viam/cache
a opt/viam/bin
a opt/viam/bin/viam-agent
a opt/viam/bin/agent-provisioning
a opt/viam/cache/viam-agent-provisioning-factory-aarch64
a opt/viam/cache/viam-agent-factory-aarch64
a etc
a usr
a usr/local
a usr/local/lib
a usr/local/lib/systemd
a usr/local/lib/systemd/system
a usr/local/lib/systemd/system/viam-agent.service
a usr/local/lib/systemd/system/multi-user.target.wants
a usr/local/lib/systemd/system/multi-user.target.wants/viam-agent.service

Install complete! You can eject/unmount and boot the image now.
```

If you get an error, run the script for the target system's architecture:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="arm64" %}}

```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
sudo ./preinstall.sh --aarch64
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="x86_64" %}}

```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
sudo ./preinstall.sh --x86_64
```

{{% /tab %}}

> {{< /tabs >}}

Reviewer: These commands need more elaboration. They create a tarball the user needs to then manually extract into their image/filesystem as a quicker way to do a manual install. They're not just what to run if there is an error.

Author: I've added more info based on reading the script. I don't know a lot about mounting file systems so please add info if needed
